# Address structure

# Private Key is a random number
Private Key is generated by a sudo-random number generator
Typically, you use a sudo-random number generator. A pure random number is generated example Quantum noise

# Public Key is generated from the Private Key
Public Key is generated by using the Private Key and the elliptic curve function
Cardano useses the curve25519 cryptographic method

# Digital signatures use ED25519 digital signature method

# After Shelley, Cardano introduced BECH32
Bech32 is a Base32 encoding method, which is used also in Bitcoin
Bitcoin used to have Base58 encoding (0-9,a-z, A-Z) and moved then to Base32
Base10: Characters 0-9
Base16: Characters from 0-9 and A-F
Base32: Characters from 0-9, A-Z; but excluded 1, L, 0, O
Cardano used in the Byron Era also Base58 and switched then to Base32
Further information: 
# CIP 19 - Cardano Addresses:       https://cips.cardano.org/cips/cip19/
# CIP 5 - Common Bech32 Prefixes:   https://cips.cardano.org/cips/cip5/

# Shelley Base Address includes: [Prefix] + [UTXO Payment Address] + [Staking Address (Account based)] + [Checksum]
This Shelley Base Address is a Bech32 encoding of the [payment-address-public-key-hash] and the [staking-address-public-key-hash].
If you decompile the Shelley Base Address, you get the unencoded address. 
If you look at the CIP19 (https://cips.cardano.org/cips/cip19/), this unencoded address (which is a HEX-format address) is explained.
# Prefix:
The Prefix is defined in CIP 5 - Common Bech32 Prefixes (https://cips.cardano.org/cips/cip5/) and is a human readable prefix, like addr1, addr_test1, stake1, etc...
The number 1 is used as a separator between the prefix and the rest of the address. This is the only appearance of the number 1 in an address. 
If you decode the Shelley Base Address, the decoded address comprises two parts, a one-byte header and a payload part of several bytes.
The first 4 bits refers to the address-type:
[0000] refers to an address which contains [PaymentKeyHash] and [StakeKeyHash]
[0001] refers to an address which contains [ScriptHash] [StakeKeyHash]
...
The second second 4 bits refers to the network-tag
[0000] is Testnet
[0001] is Mainnet
...
## UTXO Payment Address
First you have to create a public/verification key, and the private/signing key.
The public and private key is 32 Bytes long (undecoded) and is 34 Bytes long (as Bech32 encoded). The first 2 Bytes of the 34 Bytes encoded key is the [Prefix] of the private/public key.
If you take the 32 Byte (undecoded) public key and create a hash with blake2b-256 hash algorithm, you get public key hash. If you convert this hash to Bech32, you create the Bech32 encoded UTXO Payment Address.
## Staking Address
The same as UTXO Payment Address. You take the 32 Byte (undecoded) staking public key and create a hash with blake2b-256 hash algorithm, to generate the staking public key hash. If you convert this hash to Bech32, you create the Bech32 encoded Staking Address.
## Checksum
The Checksum of the Shelley Base Address.